Creating stuff in the ICAT server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ICAT server is pretty useless if it is void of content.  So let's
start creating some objects.

We could do it by writing and running a small Python script each time
as in the last sections.  But python-icat may also be used
interactively at the Python prompt, so let's try this out::

  $ python -i login.py -s myicat_root
  Login to https://icat.example.com:8181 was successful.
  User: simple/root
  >>> client.search("SELECT f FROM Facility f")
  []

The ``-i`` command line option tells Python to enter interactive mode
after executing the ``login.py`` script from last section.

Creating simple objects
-----------------------

The :meth:`~icat.client.Client.search` result shows that there is no
``Facility`` object in ICAT.  Let's create one.  In the same session,
type::

  >>> f1 = client.new("Facility")
  >>> f1.name = "Fac1"
  >>> f1.fullName = "Facility 1"
  >>> f1.id = client.create(f1)

The :meth:`~icat.client.Client.new` method instantiates a new
``Facility`` object locally in the client.  We set some of the
attributes of this new object.  Finally, we call
:meth:`~icat.client.Client.create` to create it in the ICAT server.
The return value is the ID of the new ``Facility`` object in ICAT.
The result can be verified by repeating the search from above::

  >>> client.search("SELECT f FROM Facility f")
  [(facility){
     createId = "simple/root"
     createTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
     id = 1
     modId = "simple/root"
     modTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
     fullName = "Facility 1"
     name = "Fac1"
   }]

The same result could also have been obtained slightly differently:
the :meth:`~icat.client.Client.new` method optionally accepts keyword
arguments to set the attributes of the new object.  Furthermore, the
:class:`~icat.entity.Entity` object itself also has a
:meth:`~icat.entity.Entity.create` method to create this object in the
ICAT server.  We thus could achieve the same as above like this::

  >>> f2 = client.new("Facility", name="Fac2", fullName="Facility 2")
  >>> f2.create()

To verify the result, we check again::

  >>> client.search("SELECT f FROM Facility f")
  [(facility){
     createId = "simple/root"
     createTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
     id = 1
     modId = "simple/root"
     modTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
     fullName = "Facility 1"
     name = "Fac1"
   }, (facility){
     createId = "simple/root"
     createTime = 2023-06-28 10:41:08+02:00
     id = 2
     modId = "simple/root"
     modTime = 2023-06-28 10:41:08+02:00
     fullName = "Facility 2"
     name = "Fac2"
   }]

Relationships to other objects
------------------------------

Most objects in the ICAT are related to other objects.  Let's first
retrieve again the first facility created above using the
:meth:`~icat.client.Client.get` method::

  >>> f1 = client.get("Facility", 1)

The arguments are the name of the entity object class and the ID of
the object to fetch.  You might need to adapt that second argument, if
the ICAT server attributed a different ID to your first facility, see
the output from the :meth:`~icat.client.Client.search` call above.

Now consider the following example::

  >>> pt1 = client.new("ParameterType")
  >>> pt1.name = "Test parameter type 1"
  >>> pt1.units = "pct"
  >>> pt1.applicableToDataset = True
  >>> pt1.valueType = "NUMERIC"
  >>> pt1.facility = f1
  >>> pt1.create()

The ``ParameterType`` has a many to one relationship to a
``Facility``.  This relationship is established by setting the
corresponding attribute in the ``ParameterType`` object before
creating it in the ICAT.  The ``Facility`` must already exist at this
point.

On the other hand, there is also a one to many relationship between
``ParameterType`` and ``PermissibleStringValue`` in the ICAT schema.
Let's create a ``ParameterType`` with string values::

  >>> pt2 = client.new("ParameterType")
  >>> pt2.name = "Test parameter type 2"
  >>> pt2.units = "N/A"
  >>> pt2.applicableToDataset = True
  >>> pt2.valueType = "STRING"
  >>> pt2.facility = f1
  >>> for v in ["buono", "brutto", "cattivo"]:
  ...     psv = client.new("PermissibleStringValue", value=v)
  ...     pt2.permissibleStringValues.append(psv)
  ...
  >>> pt2.create()

The ``permissibleStringValues`` attribute of ``ParameterType`` is a
list.  We may add new ``PermissibleStringValue`` instances to this
list before creating the object.  The ``PermissibleStringValue``
instances should not yet exist in ICAT at this point, they will be
created together with the ``ParameterType`` object.

We can verify this by searching for the newly created objects::

  >>> query = ("SELECT pt FROM ParameterType pt "
  ...          "INCLUDE pt.facility, pt.permissibleStringValues")
  >>> client.search(query)
  [(parameterType){
     createId = "simple/root"
     createTime = 2023-06-28 10:43:06+02:00
     id = 1
     modId = "simple/root"
     modTime = 2023-06-28 10:43:06+02:00
     applicableToDataCollection = False
     applicableToDatafile = False
     applicableToDataset = True
     applicableToInvestigation = False
     applicableToSample = False
     enforced = False
     facility =
        (facility){
           createId = "simple/root"
           createTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
           id = 1
           modId = "simple/root"
           modTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
           fullName = "Facility 1"
           name = "Fac1"
        }
     name = "Test parameter type 1"
     units = "pct"
     valueType = "NUMERIC"
     verified = False
   }, (parameterType){
     createId = "simple/root"
     createTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
     id = 2
     modId = "simple/root"
     modTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
     applicableToDataCollection = False
     applicableToDatafile = False
     applicableToDataset = True
     applicableToInvestigation = False
     applicableToSample = False
     enforced = False
     facility =
        (facility){
           createId = "simple/root"
           createTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
           id = 1
           modId = "simple/root"
           modTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
           fullName = "Facility 1"
           name = "Fac1"
        }
     name = "Test parameter type 2"
     permissibleStringValues[] =
        (permissibleStringValue){
           createId = "simple/root"
           createTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
           id = 1
           modId = "simple/root"
           modTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
           value = "cattivo"
        },
        (permissibleStringValue){
           createId = "simple/root"
           createTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
           id = 2
           modId = "simple/root"
           modTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
           value = "buono"
        },
        (permissibleStringValue){
           createId = "simple/root"
           createTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
           id = 3
           modId = "simple/root"
           modTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
           value = "brutto"
        },
     units = "N/A"
     valueType = "STRING"
     verified = False
   }]

As expected, we get a list of two ``ParameterType`` objects as result,
one of them related to a couple of ``PermissibleStringValue`` objects
that have been created at the same time as the related
``ParameterType`` object.

Access rules
------------

Until now, we connected the ICAT server as the ``root`` user.  Let's
try what happens if we choose another user::

  $ python -i login.py -s myicat_jdoe
  Login to https://icat.example.com:8181 was successful.
  User: db/jdoe
  >>> client.search("SELECT pt FROM ParameterType pt INCLUDE pt.facility")
  []

We can't get any of the objects created above from ICAT.  The reason
is that we don't have the permission to access these objects.  ICAT
has a default deny access policy: only the ``root`` user has read and
write access to everything, all other users get only access, if there
is a rule that explicitely allows it.

Let's add some rules to allow public read access to some object types.
Connect again as ``root`` and enter::

  $ python -i login.py -s myicat_root
  Login to https://icat.example.com:8181 was successful.
  User: simple/root
  >>> publicTables = [ "Application", "DatafileFormat", "DatasetType",
  ...                  "Facility", "FacilityCycle", "Instrument",
  ...                  "InvestigationType", "ParameterType",
  ...                  "PermissibleStringValue", "SampleType", ]
  >>> queries = [ "SELECT o FROM %s o" % t for t in publicTables ]
  >>> client.createRules("R", queries)
  [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]

The :meth:`~icat.client.Client.createRules` method takes an access
mode and a list of search queries (and optionally a group) as
arguments.  It will add rules that allow access to all objects yielded
by a search for any of the queries.  The access mode is ``"R"`` for
read access in this example.  :meth:`~icat.client.Client.createRules`
is a convenience method in python-icat roughly equivalent to::

  >>> rules = []
  >>> for w in queries:
  ...     r = client.new("Rule", crudFlags="R", what=w)
  ...     rules.append(r)
  ...
  >>> client.createMany(rules)

If we now try again to search for the objects as normal user, we get::

  $ python -i login.py -s myicat_jdoe
  Login to https://icat.example.com:8181 was successful.
  User: db/jdoe
  >>> client.search("SELECT pt FROM ParameterType pt INCLUDE pt.facility")
  [(parameterType){
     createId = "simple/root"
     createTime = 2023-06-28 10:43:06+02:00
     id = 1
     modId = "simple/root"
     modTime = 2023-06-28 10:43:06+02:00
     applicableToDataCollection = False
     applicableToDatafile = False
     applicableToDataset = True
     applicableToInvestigation = False
     applicableToSample = False
     enforced = False
     facility =
        (facility){
           createId = "simple/root"
           createTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
           id = 1
           modId = "simple/root"
           modTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
           fullName = "Facility 1"
           name = "Fac1"
        }
     name = "Test parameter type 1"
     units = "pct"
     valueType = "NUMERIC"
     verified = False
   }, (parameterType){
     createId = "simple/root"
     createTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
     id = 2
     modId = "simple/root"
     modTime = 2023-06-28 10:44:28+02:00
     applicableToDataCollection = False
     applicableToDatafile = False
     applicableToDataset = True
     applicableToInvestigation = False
     applicableToSample = False
     enforced = False
     facility =
        (facility){
           createId = "simple/root"
           createTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
           id = 1
           modId = "simple/root"
           modTime = 2023-06-28 10:39:26+02:00
           fullName = "Facility 1"
           name = "Fac1"
        }
     name = "Test parameter type 2"
     units = "N/A"
     valueType = "STRING"
     verified = False
   }]
